# Project 1: World Development Statistics (Replace with Actual Title)
*Author: Deval Mehta*

## Table of Contents
1) [Overview](#Overview) 
2) [Data](#Data-Dictionary)
3) [Requirements](#Requirements)
4) [Executive Summary](#Executive-Summary)
    1) [Purpose](#Purpose)
    2) [Methods](#Methods)
    3) [Findings](#Findings)
    4) [Next Steps](#Next-Steps)

## Overview

[The United States spends more per student than any country in the world](https://nces.ed.gov/blogs/nces/post/education-at-a-glance-2023-putting-u-s-data-in-a-global-context) (save Luxembourg), yet we still only have an 87% completion rate for upper secondary education according to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development's (OECD) annual [*Education at a Glance*](https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/sites/e13bef63-en/1/3/3/3/index.html?itemId=/content/publication/e13bef63-en&_csp_=a4f4b3d408c9dd70d167f10de61b8717&itemIGO=oecd&itemContentType=book#annex-d1e22113-dea59c5599) report. Comparatively, Lithuania, who spends about 3/8 as much as the US per student, has a comparable upper secondary completion rate. This suggests that there are other factors at play, including wasted expenditure, which see our educational outcomes stagnating and, in some cases dropping.

Often left unconsidered is the "wealth gap," the disparity in national share of wealth held by those of the most means and those of the fewest. We strive to determine whether educational outcomes and wealth inequality covary significantly enough across the world to warrant further exploration in pursuit of improving education attainment levels in the United States. To do so, we consider duration of compulsary education and the percent of the population over 25 to have attained at least a Bachelor's degree compared against the share of pretax income held by the 10% of individuals by wealth and the Gini coefficient over the 20 year span from 1998 to 2017. Due to a lack of relevant data, we find the results to be rather inconclusive, but there may still be promising work to be done with more widely available data and imputation methods for missing data.

## Data Dictionary

|Dataset|Type|Description|
|---|---|---|
|trimmed_duration_compulsary_education|float|Number of years of compulsary education by year.|
|trimmed_educ_attainment_ba_total|float|Percent of national population age 25 and older who hold at least a Bachelor's Degree by year.|
|trimmed_educ_attainment_ba_female|float|Percent of women age 25 and older who hold at least a Bachelor's Degree by year.|
|trimmed_educ_attainment_ba_male|float|Percent of men age 25 and older who hold at least a Bachelor's Degree by year.|
|trimmed_gini_index|float|[Gini Index](https://ourworldindata.org/what-is-the-gini-coefficient) by year, a measure of wealth inequality.
|trimmed_wid_pretax_income_share_top10|float|Percent share of national wealth held by the wealthiest 10% of individuals by year|

## Executive Summary

An executive summary is a brief summary of the key points and objectives of a project. The purpose of an executive summary is to provide a high-level overview of the project and to give readers a clear understanding of what the project is about and what it aims to achieve.

An effective executive summary should provide a clear and concise summary of the project, including its goals, methodology, key findings, and conclusions. It should be written in a way that is easy to understand for a broad audience, including those who may not have technical expertise in the project's subject matter.

Some key elements that may be included in an executive summary are:

* A summary of the problem or challenge the project is addressing
* An explanation of the project's goals and objectives
* A summary of the project methodology, including any data sources, data cleaning, EDA & analysis techniques, or models used
* A summary of the key findings or insights generated by the project. Feel free to include images of your visualizations here!
* A conclusion that summarizes the main results and their implications. You may want to consider the following question as you craft your conclusion: "How can the audience 
use the insights generated by this project to inform their decisions or actions?"
* Next steps - This can include recommendations for future research or analysis, ideas for how to improve upon the project's methodology or data sources, and/or suggestions for how to extend or expand the project in new directions.

By including an executive summary in your project's readme file, you can help ensure that readers have a clear understanding of the project's purpose, methodology, and 
findings, even if they don't have time to read the entire document.

Have any questions? Let us know!

**Important note: In order, for your readme to display as the default readme file in GitHub, it will need to be named `README.md`. This means that before submitting your project, you should either delete or replace the original `README.md` with your own version!** 

### Purpose
Wealth inequality often finds itself on the national policy stage, increasingly so following the Great Recession of the 2000s and the galvanization of working class Americans in the 2016 Presidential election. Seldom do we hear about its potential relationship to education outcomes. At a glance, one might believe the two to be totally unrelated, but there is, in principle a feedback loop, where a more educated public will elect to improve the quality of life for themselves and others, sometimes through wealth redistribution, which then leads to more people having an opportunity to reach higher outcomes. As such, we suspect there might be a reasonable level of covariance between education outcomes in a nation and their level of wealth inequality.

In particular, such a result would mean the United States as a whole ought to push for a more level wealth distribution than we have historically seen. The null hypothesis would mean that the path upon which we, as a country, have embarked, where disparities in wealth among the top 10% and bottom 50% grow, should remain the status quo.

### Methods

The analysis herein is relatively simple. We consider the duration of compulsary education, the percent of the population (divided by sex as well) of 25 years of age or more who hold at least a bachelor's degree, the Gini Index, which measures the difference between an equal distribution of wealth across the population and the existing distribution of wealth, and the share of national wealth held by the wealthiest 10% of individuals across the 20 year span from 1998 to 2017 and across 14 countries for whom we could acquire complete data on the Gini index. We opted for a more recent analysis, as there was more data available and for the 14 countries selected to maximize the information we could gain.
- What you did
- How you changed the data
- Why you made the choices you did
- Explain any big decisions
- Split into subsections for easy reading

#### Data Handling
Much of the data files were removed for our analysis, as stated above, as they were incredibly sparse with information. Further, a more recent analysis will yield more accurate results, as the wealth share and education outcomes are a function of legislation passed and enforced. Some older laws have been repealed and newer ones (such as No Child Left Behind in the US) have been passed, which impact both wealth distribution and outcomes, but are not specifically accounted in our data otherwise.

#### EDA
We created only basic lineplots with the data we had available, as time did not permit shuffling the dataframes to organize the data by country, rather than by metric.

### Findings
With what little data we have available to us, we note a couple of trends. Among our sample, education outcomes appear to be on the rise, year over year, while wealth inequality is either stagnant, oscillatory, or increasing. **The lack of a clear trend on the part of wealth inequality makes it difficult to draw any conclusions regarding a relationship between the two.** In addition, while the Gini coefficient is rising for most of our sample, the share of national wealth among the top 10% does not appear to rise at a comparable rate, suggesting that perhaps more of the national wealth share has been distributed among the 50th to 90th percentiles of the population, which could mean higher outcomes for a portion of the population. Gender bias does not appear to have an impact either, as the percent attainment of a Bachelor's degree appears to take the same ratio for men and women over time.

### Next Steps
A more careful analysis in the future would see the dataframes shuffled so that each one represents a different nation with more complete data and perhaps some more accurate imputation techniques to cover missing data. Incorporating more basic metrics for education outcomes, such as literacy rate, secondary school completion rate, and math achievement by the end of secondary education could yield more accurate results.

Further, if an apt covariance were to be found with more complete data, we could create various regression models to determine just how influential education outcomes and wealth inequality are on each other.
